[Encryption] Add cluster state encryption docs (#152731)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/elasticsearch/cluster-state-encryption-key.md

## Upgrade existing deployments [cluster-state-encryption-upgrades]

You don't need to configure an encryption password to upgrade an existing deployment. If no password is configured after the upgrade, the cluster remains healthy and reports that cluster state encryption is not configured. Because encryption is required by default, {{es}} rejects attempts to store feature-managed secrets with an HTTP `503` response until a password is configured.

* **Self-managed deployments:** Automatic security setup doesn't run again during an upgrade. Before a feature first stores a managed secret, configure `cluster.state.encryption.password.<id>` and `cluster.state.encryption.active_password_id` in the keystore on every node, then call `POST /_nodes/reload_secure_settings`. A restart isn't required.
* **{{ech}} and {{ece}} deployments:** When an existing deployment is upgraded to 9.5 or later, the control plane provisions the password and reloads the secure settings automatically.

## Rotate the encryption password [cluster-state-encryption-password-rotation]

> You can rotate the password without restarting {{es}}. The old password must remain available until every node has loaded the new password and {{es}} has rewrapped the cluster state encryption key.

Reviewer: nit: the phrasing here suggest that there is a single password, same on all nodes, and that the rotation must happen in sync. In fact, the password is node-specific, and each node can have its own password, and can rotate it independently from every other node. For a single node, the below procedure is correct.

While you could change all passwords at the same time (nothing prevents that), you can also rotate e.g. only some one them. And while you can set them so that all passwords are identical, it would be better (more secure) if they were different for each node.

Reviewer 2: Clarified that passwords are node-local, should use unique values, and can be rotated independently with node-targeted reload and verification in [090ca868652f](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/152731/commits/090ca868652f).

1. On every node, add the new password to the local {{es}} keystore. For example, to use the password ID `v2`:

   ```sh
   bin/elasticsearch-keystore add cluster.state.encryption.password.v2
   ```

2. On every node, set `cluster.state.encryption.active_password_id` to `v2`:

   ```sh
   bin/elasticsearch-keystore add -f cluster.state.encryption.active_password_id
   ```

3. Reload the secure settings:

   ```console
   POST /_nodes/reload_secure_settings
   ```

4. Send the following request directly to every node's HTTP endpoint:

   ```console
   GET /_health_report/cluster_state_encryption
   ```

>    Before proceeding, verify that every node reports a green status and that both `active_password_id` and `metadata_password_id` are `v2`. There is currently no single API call that verifies the password rotation across every node.

Reviewer: As per me comment above, an API that verifies password rotation across every node doesn't make sense. There isn't one now, and there won't be in future (unless we change architecture).

Reviewer 2: Removed the cluster-wide verification statement and scoped verification to the node being rotated in [090ca868652f](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/152731/commits/090ca868652f).

---
navigation_title: "Cluster state encryption"
description: "How Elasticsearch encrypts sensitive values stored in cluster state using a cluster state encryption key, including password requirements, key rotation, and recovery."
applies_to:
  stack: ga 9.5
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Cluster state encryption [cluster-state-encryption]

> Some {{es}} features need to store sensitive values, such as credentials for {{esql}} data federation, in cluster state. With **cluster state encryption**, this data is protected both at rest and in transit between nodes, so that secrets are never persisted or replicated in plain text.

Reviewer 3: @leemthompo , @bytebilly , would it make sense to present this feature and its no-relation with encryption at rest or BYOK? With something like:

> Cluster state encryption is independent of any [encryption-at-rest](LINK-to-encryption-at-rest) mechanism, including [customer-managed encryption keys (BYOK)](LINK-to-byok), that protects node storage. Those mechanisms protect data at the storage layer, while cluster state encryption protects sensitive values before they are written to cluster state and while they are replicated between nodes.

Maybe within a `note` later in the section?

Reviewer 3: Awesome! You had already included it in a note!! 🤦 

Sorry for the noise!

Reviewer 2: no worries thanks for all your help here @eedugon! 👍

---

> navigation_title: "Cluster state encryption key"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
navigation_title: "Cluster state encryption"
```

I think we should frame it as "Cluster state encryption".
The key is a _key_ (heh 🙂 ) part of it, but we're describing more than that.

description: "How Elasticsearch encrypts sensitive values stored in cluster state using a cluster state encryption key, including password requirements, key rotation, and recovery."

> applies_to:

Reviewer 4: Is this a tech preview functionality, or GA?
I'm not sure we discussed that.

Reviewer 2: @cyrilblanchet-elastic do you have an answer for this one?

Reviewer 5: After discussing it internally, the feature should be marked as GA.

Reviewer 2: Marked the feature GA in [0909703b1c23](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/152731/commits/0909703b1c23).

  stack: preview 9.5
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

> # Cluster state encryption key [cluster-state-encryption-key]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Cluster state encryption [cluster-state-encryption]
```

Aligned with the previous comments.

> Some {{es}} features need to store sensitive values, such as credentials for {{esql}} data federation, in cluster state. The **cluster state encryption key** encrypts this data at rest and in transit between nodes, so that secrets are never persisted or replicated in plain text.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some {{es}} features need to store sensitive values, such as credentials for {{esql}} data federation, in cluster state. With **cluster state encryption**, this data is protected both at rest and in transit between nodes, so that secrets are never persisted or replicated in plain text.
```

Aligned with the previous comments.

{{es}} generates a single, cluster-wide encryption key automatically. Features that need to persist secrets never handle the key directly. They call an internal encryption service that encrypts and decrypts values on their behalf. The key itself is never exposed through any API.

> The first feature to use this mechanism is [{{esql}} data federation](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-federated-data.md), which encrypts the credentials used to connect to external data sources. Other features may adopt it over time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first feature to use this mechanism is [{{esql}} data federation](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation.md), which encrypts the credentials used to connect to external data sources. Other features may adopt it over time.
```

> ## How the key works [cluster-state-encryption-key-lifecycle]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## How the cluster state encryption key works [cluster-state-encryption-key-lifecycle]
```

{{es}} generates the cluster state encryption key automatically and stores it in cluster state, where it's distributed to every node. It's excluded from cluster state REST responses and from snapshots.

Each node keeps a copy of the key in memory. To survive a restart, a node also persists a copy of the key to local disk, protected by a password so it isn't stored in plain text.

> ## Set the encryption password [cluster-state-encryption-key-password]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Protect the cluster state encryption key with a password [cluster-state-encryption-key-password]
```

To let a node persist the key to disk, it needs a password configured in the {{es}} keystore:

`cluster.state.encryption.password.<id>`
:   A secure setting holding an encryption password, identified by `<id>`.

`cluster.state.encryption.active_password_id`
:   The `<id>` of the password currently used to protect newly written keys.

**On {{ecloud}}, {{ece}}, and {{eck}}**, the control plane supplies this password automatically.

> **On self-managed** deployments, this password is normally generated for you automatically on a node's first start, alongside TLS setup, and stored in the keystore as `cluster.state.encryption.password.autoconfigured`. Configure one yourself with [`elasticsearch-keystore`](/reference/elasticsearch/command-line-tools/elasticsearch-keystore.md) only if that didn't happen.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**On self-managed standalone Stack** deployments, this password is generated by the [automatic security setup](/deploy-manage/security/self-auto-setup.md) on a node's first start, and stored in the keystore as `cluster.state.encryption.password.autoconfigured`.

Configure one yourself with [`elasticsearch-keystore`](/reference/elasticsearch/command-line-tools/elasticsearch-keystore.md) if the aumatic security setup is not executed.
```

ECE and ECK are also self-managed, so we need more clarity here.
I added links to the automatic security setup. That page should be updated to mention it creates the encryption password.

> 

Reviewer 4: Can we add instructions to rotate the password?

Reviewer 2: Added the confirmed no-restart rotation procedure, including per-node health checks and safe removal of the old password, in [cc8ffbe0eeda](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/152731/commits/cc8ffbe0eeda).

`cluster.state.encryption.required`
:   Whether a password is required before {{es}} will store secrets using the cluster state encryption key. Defaults to `true`. Setting this to `false` is **not recommended**: {{es}} falls back to storing secrets in plain text instead, and logs a warning.

## Automatic key rotation [cluster-state-encryption-key-rotation]

> {{es}} rotates the cluster state encryption key automatically. You can control the schedule with:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{es}} rotates the cluster state encryption key (not the password in the keystore) automatically. You can control the schedule with:
```

People can be confused between key and password, better clarify.

`xpack.encryption.key_rotation.interval`
:   How often the key is rotated. Defaults to `30d`. Set to `0` to disable automatic rotation.

`xpack.encryption.key_rotation.check_interval`
:   How often {{es}} checks whether rotation is due. Defaults to `1h`, must be at least `1s`, and can't be greater than `key_rotation.interval`.

> ## Check encryption health [cluster-state-encryption-key-health]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Check cluster state encryption health [cluster-state-encryption-key-health]
```

Better having explicit titles, they may be referred in other pages and docs and be simpler to understand.

> The `cluster_state_encryption` health indicator reports on the status of the cluster state encryption key:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `cluster_state_encryption` health indicator reports on the status of the cluster state encryption:
```

* **Green**: encryption is either working normally, or hasn't been configured (which is expected on most self-managed clusters that haven't set a password).
* **Yellow**: a password is missing where one is required, a node can't persist the key to disk, or {{es}} failed to decrypt the key.

## Reset the cluster state encryption key [cluster-state-encryption-key-reset]

:::{warning}
Resetting the cluster state encryption key is **destructive and irreversible**. Any data that was encrypted with the previous key is permanently lost.
:::

> As a last resort, for example after suspected key compromise or an unrecoverable encryption state, you can discard the current cluster state encryption key and everything encrypted with it:

Reviewer 4: Is a key compromise really a scenario that applies here? Can't I just rotate the key?

Reviewer 2: @cyrilblanchet-elastic

Reviewer 5: > Is a key compromise really a scenario that applies here?

It's not. The destructive reset is primarily used in case of unrecoverable corruption/loss of encryption password.

Reviewer 2: Limited destructive reset to unrecoverable password loss or corruption, and removed key compromise as an example, in [32d8751ae08f](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/152731/commits/32d8751ae08f).

## How the cluster state encryption key works [cluster-state-encryption-key-lifecycle]

{{es}} generates the cluster state encryption key automatically and stores it in cluster state, where it's distributed to every node. It's excluded from cluster state REST responses and from snapshots.

Each node keeps a copy of the key in memory. To survive a restart, a node also persists a copy of the key to local disk, protected by a password so it isn't stored in plain text.

## Protect the cluster state encryption key with a password [cluster-state-encryption-key-password]

To let a node persist the key to disk, it needs a password configured in the {{es}} keystore:

`cluster.state.encryption.password.<id>`
:   A secure setting holding an encryption password, identified by `<id>`.

`cluster.state.encryption.active_password_id`
:   The `<id>` of the password currently used to protect newly written keys.

**On {{ecloud}}, {{ece}}, and {{eck}}**, the control plane supplies this password automatically.

> **On self-managed standalone Stack** deployments, this password is generated by the [automatic security setup](/deploy-manage/security/self-auto-setup.md) on a node's first start, and stored in the keystore as `cluster.state.encryption.password.autoconfigured`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**On self-managed standalone Stack** deployments, this password is generated by the [automatic security setup](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/self-auto-setup.md) on a node's first start, and stored in the keystore as `cluster.state.encryption.password.autoconfigured`.
```

> Configure one yourself with [`elasticsearch-keystore`](/reference/elasticsearch/command-line-tools/elasticsearch-keystore.md) if the aumatic security setup is not executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure one yourself with [`elasticsearch-keystore`](/reference/elasticsearch/command-line-tools/elasticsearch-keystore.md) if the automatic security setup is not executed.
```
